Update the tutorial on how to import data using Desktop (#193)
neo4j/docs-getting-started: modules/ROOT/pages/appendix/tutorials/guide-import-desktop-csv.adoc

= How-To: Import CSV data with Neo4j Desktop
:tags: data-import, import-csv, graph-import, desktop, load-csv, cypher
:description: You will learn how to import data from CSV files to a Neo4j graph database using the Neo4j Desktop application. This tutorial is designed for you to follow along and step through the process.

[[about-desktop-import]]
== Introduction

Neo4j Desktop provides a user-friendly interface for creating and starting Neo4j instances, adding or removing plugins, changing configurations, and other functionality.
It also includes some shortcuts and easy access for importing files (such as CSVs) into Neo4j.

In this guide, you will work with a zipped folder containing three CSV files and import the data to a graph with Neo4j Desktop.
The CSV files contain data for products, orders, and order line items.
You will look at the data in the files later in this guide.

[[start-db]]
== Creating and starting the Neo4j instance

[TIP]
====
If you already know how to create a Project in Neo4j Desktop, create a Neo4j instance (DBMS), and start the DBMS, you can skip to the next step: <<csv-location>>.
====

> If you open Neo4j Desktop for the first time, you will see a *Neo4j Primer Project* with the _Movie Database_ already started.

Reviewer: Just out of curiosity: in terms of style guide, haven't we discussed something about avoiding using "you" so often in the docs or are we just avoiding participles?

You can use this database if you want to begin learning about using Neo4j and Cypher.

However, you can create your own Project which can contain one or more DBMSs.

> Let's take a look on how to create a new Project, create and start a Neo4j instance in Neo4j Desktop.

Reviewer: Again about style guide, are we using "let's" and other expressions like this? Also, there's an oxford comma missing before "and start". :)

> . You can only have a single DBMS running, so you must first stop the DBMS that is started by clicking the `Stop` button at the top bar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. You can only have a single DBMS running, so you must first stop the DBMS that is started by clicking the `Stop` button on the top bar.
```

As the result, you can see that there is *No active DBMS*.

> . To add a new project, go to the *Projects* drawer at the left sidebar by clicking the icon (image:neo4j-desktop-project-icon.png[width=30]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. To add a new project, go to the *Projects* drawer on the left sidebar by clicking the icon (image:neo4j-desktop-project-icon.png[width=30]).
```

Reviewer: Also, all images should be .svg instead of .png. If you need help converting them, just let me know :)

> Then click `New` button in front of *Projects*. +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then click on the `New` button in front of *Projects*. +
```

Author: we have no clear strategy on using "click vs click on". If you take a look at other manuals you'll find many cases of using "click sth". Do you think we need to change it here?

Reviewer: Not really, it was just a suggestion! :)

This creates a project named *Project*.

> . You can change the name of a project by hovering over the area to the right of its name and selecting the `Edit` button.

Reviewer: You referred to project with capital P previously. Should this one be capitalized too?
Also, I think the way the instruction is written here is a bit confusing. I would suggest shortening it a little bit, something like:

"To change the name of a project, hover it and select the `Edit` button."

> +

Reviewer: I think you can add another breaking line as the image is too close to the text.

image::generic-name_project.png[role="popup-link",650]
+

> Then you type a name for the project and select the `Check` button to save the name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Type a name for the project and select the `Check` button to save it.
```

+
image::generic-change_project_name.png[role="popup-link",650]
+

> . Next, you will create a local DBMS in a project.

Reviewer: In a project or for a project?

Author: 'in a project' It's used in the Desktop manual and old dev.guides

> In the project where you want to add the DBMS, click the `Add` button on the right hand side, and then select *Local DBMS*. +

Reviewer: I think many of the sentences are too verbose and they could be shortened a little bit for simplicity and also to make the page less bloated. Something like:

```suggestion
Click on the `Add` button beside the name of the project where you want to add the DBMS and then select *Local DBMS*. +
```
Also, should we add specific commands like "right side" of the button? I wonder in case this is changed in future updates. It's very minor but it would impact the documentation. But at the same time, this is good for people with reduced visibility, I think.

> This opens a dialog where you can specify the details of the DBMS.

Reviewer: Not sure if this is necessary, but:

```suggestion
This opens a dialog box where you can specify the details of the DBMS.
```

Reviewer: I would also remove the previous + as the breaking line is looking weird on the page. I guess it would be better if this sentence was in the same paragraph as it gives continuity to the previous one.

> . Next step is to name your DBMS.

Reviewer: Maybe avoid saying "next" again as the previous step already started with "next"

You can use the default name for the DBMS, which is _Graph DBMS_, but it is recommended to rename it so that helps to identify the use case for the DBMS.

> For more details, see link:https://neo4j.com/docs/upgrade-migration-guide/current/version-4/migration/surface-changes/database/#_database_naming_rules[Upgrade and Migration Guide -> Database naming rules].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more details, see link:https://neo4j.com/docs/upgrade-migration-guide/current/version-4/migration/surface-changes/database/#_database_naming_rules[Upgrade and Migration Guide -> Database naming rules]. +
```
Just to give more space between elements

+

> Here we specify _MyDBMS_ as the name:

Reviewer: We shouldn't use "we" in the docs

+
image::generic-name_DBMS.png[role="popup-link",650]
+

> . You [underline]#must# specify a password for the DBMS, so enter a password that you will remember:

Reviewer: I think it would be better to recommend the user to store the password they enter instead of suggesting to pick one that they can remember, for security reasons. Not sure if this is relevant here as it is a local DBMS, but still?

+
image::generic-password_DBMS.png[role="popup-link",650]
+

> Starting with *Neo4j 5.3*, the initial password must be at least *eight characters* long. 

Reviewer: Maybe this could be an admonition?

+
. Neo4j Desktop will create a DBMS with the default version for Neo4j Desktop.
However, you can select a different version.
Keep in mind that if there is a down arrow shown next to the version, this means that Neo4j Desktop will need to download resources for that particular version of the DBMS. 

> To do this you [underline]#must# be connected to the Internet:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do this you [underline]#must# be connected to the Internet: +
```

+
image::generic-version_DBMS.png[role="popup-link",650]
+

> . After you have specifed the details for the DBMS you want to create, you click the `Create` button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. After specifying the details for the DBMS, click the `Create` button.
```

And here is what you should see after the DBMS is successfully created:
+
image::generic-DBMS_created.png[role="popup-link"]
+

> . Recall that you cannot have more than one DBMS started.

Reviewer: Not sure if "recall" is looking good here. Maybe something like "keep in mind" would feel more idiomatic? Just a suggestion.

Author: addressed

> Provided you have no other DBMSs started in Neo4j Desktop, you can start your newly-created DBMS by hovering to the right of the DBMS name and clicking the `Start` button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Provided that there is no other DBMS started in Neo4j Desktop, you can start your newly-created DBMS by hovering to the right of its name and clicking the `Start` button.
```

+
The DBMS will take a few seconds to start. After it is started, you should see something like this:
+
image::generic-DBMS_started.png[role="popup-link"]

> After the DBMS is started, you can access it with clients running on your system such as Neo4j Browser, Neo4j Bloom, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the DBMS is started, you can access it with clients running on your system such as Neo4j Browser, Neo4j Bloom etc.
```

In Neo4j Desktop, the DBMS is an Enterprise Server, but it can only be accessed locally.

[[csv-location]]
== Putting CSV files in the import folder

First, download this https://s3.amazonaws.com/dev.assets.neo4j.com/wp-content/uploads/desktop-csv-import.zip[zip file^].
Uncompress/unzip this file which should yield three CSV files for products, orders, and order details.
You will put these files in the *import* folder that Neo4j expects for imports.

You can open a finder window in Neo4j Desktop by hovering over the three dots to the right started DBMS and selecting *Open folder*, and then *Import*:

image::generic-open_import_folder.png[role="popup-link"]

Another option is to copy or move the three CSV files into the *import directory* on your system.
For more information on Neo4j file locations, see https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/5/configuration/file-locations/[Operations Manual -> Default file locations].

Now that your files are in the *import* folder, you can import the data into the database managed by the DBMS.
You will use the current table and column format in the CSV files and translate it into nodes and relationships.

> This can be done a few different ways, but you will use Cypher's `LOAD CSV` command in this guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be done in a few different ways, but you will use Cypher's `LOAD CSV` command in this guide.
```

[[loadcsv-desktop]]
== LOAD CSV

`LOAD CSV` is a built-in command in Cypher that allows you to read CSV files and append regular Cypher queries to create or update the data as a graph.
You can also use `LOAD CSV` without creating the graph to output samples, counts, or distributions.
This helps to detect incorrect header column counts, delimiters, quotes, escapes, or spelling of header names before the data is written and stored.

To enter and run Cypher queries on a started DBMS, you can:

. Use link:https://neo4j.com/docs/browser-manual/current/[Neo4j Browser]:

> .. Click the `Open` button for the started DBMS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Click the `Open` button for the started DBMS.
```

.. Type or copy Cypher queries into the edit pane at the top (link:https://neo4j.com/docs/browser-manual/current/visual-tour/#editor[Cypher editor]).
.. Execute the Cypher with the `play` button on the right.
. Use link:https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/current/tools/cypher-shell/[Cypher Shell]:
.. Click the drop-down menu to the right of the `Open` button and select *Terminal*.

> To use Cypher Shell:

Reviewer: These next steps are part of the previous list, no? If so, I would recommend aligning them as part of the same list.

Author: ✅

. Enter `bin/cypher-shell`.
. Enter *neo4j* for the user.
. Enter the password you specified for the DBMS.
. All Cypher queries must end with semicolon `;` in Cypher Shell.
. Use `:exit` to quit.

Earlier you downloaded the *.zip* file and copied its CSV files to the *import* folder for the DBMS.

> Before you insert anything into your graph database, you should inspect the data in the files a bit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you insert anything into your graph database, you should inspect the data in the files.
```

To do this, you can use the `LOAD CSV` statement.

> If you opened the files previously, you may have noticed that two of the files have headers and one does not (*products.csv*).

Reviewer: We shouldn't use "us" in the docs

[[loadcsv-desktop]]
== LOAD CSV

`LOAD CSV` is a built-in command in Cypher that allows you to read CSV files and append regular Cypher queries to create or update the data as a graph.
You can also use `LOAD CSV` without creating the graph to output samples, counts, or distributions.
This helps to detect incorrect header column counts, delimiters, quotes, escapes, or spelling of header names before the data is written and stored.

To enter and run Cypher queries on a started DBMS, you can:

. Use link:https://neo4j.com/docs/browser-manual/current/[Neo4j Browser]:
.. Click the `Open` button for the started DBMS.
.. Type or copy Cypher queries into the edit pane at the top (link:https://neo4j.com/docs/browser-manual/current/visual-tour/#editor[Cypher editor]).
.. Execute the Cypher with the `play` button on the right.
. Use link:https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/current/tools/cypher-shell/[Cypher Shell]:
.. Click the drop-down menu to the right of the `Open` button and select *Terminal*.
.. Enter `bin/cypher-shell`.
.. Enter *neo4j* for the user.
.. Enter the password you specified for the DBMS.

> .. All Cypher queries must end with semicolon `;` in Cypher Shell.

Author: good idea

> First, you can check how many lines are in the CSV files to ensure they didn't get corrupted or cut off from a potential export process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, check how many lines are in the CSV files to ensure they were not corrupted or cut off from a potential export process.
```

> For the files with headers, you simply add the `WITH HEADERS` clause after `LOAD CSV`, so that it excludes the header row in the count and only counts the rows of data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For files with headers, you can add the `WITH HEADERS` clause after `LOAD CSV`, so that it excludes the header row in the count, and only counts the rows of data.
```

> You should run this Cypher:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should run this Cypher query:
```

* 830 rows for *orders.csv*
* 2155 rows for *order-details.csv*

[[inspect-files]]
== View data with `LOAD CSV`

Next, you can take a look at what the data looks like in the CSV files and how `LOAD CSV` sees it.
The only line you need to change from the Cypher query above is the `RETURN` clause.

> Since all of these files have several rows, use `LIMIT` to only get a sample.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since these files have several rows, use `LIMIT` to only get a sample.
```

* 830 rows for *orders.csv*
* 2155 rows for *order-details.csv*

[[inspect-files]]
== View data with `LOAD CSV`

> Next, you can take a look at what the data looks like in the CSV files and how `LOAD CSV` sees it.

Reviewer: Line 172: Cypher query above?

|===

Notice that *orders.csv* and *order-details.csv* return data in a different format than products.csv.

> This is because those files have headers, so the column names are returned with the values for those rows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is because these files have headers, so the column names are returned with the values for those rows.
```

> Since the *products.csv* does not have column names, then `LOAD CSV` just returns the plain data row from the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since *products.csv* does not have column names, then `LOAD CSV` just returns the plain data row from the file.
```

[[filtering-load]]

> == Filtering what you load with `LOAD CSV`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Filtering loaded data with `LOAD CSV`
```

> This is because those files have headers, so the column names are returned with the values for those rows.

Reviewer: In the previous line, should it be like this?

"Notice that *orders.csv* and *order-details.csv* return in a different format than *products.csv*.

And the next:

Since *products.csv* does not have column names, then `LOAD CSV` just returns the plain data row from the file.

There are a variety of conversion functions in Cypher.
The ones you will use for this exercise are as follows:

* `*toInteger()*`: converts a value to an integer.
* `*toFloat()*`: converts a value to a float (in this case, for monetary amounts).

> * `*datetime()*`: converts a value to a datetime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `*datetime()*`: converts a value to a date/time.
```

> There are a variety of conversion functions in Cypher.

Reviewer: I would change the previous line to something like

So, before you import, make sure you convert any values that are non-string.

The ones you will use for this exercise are as follows:

* `*toInteger()*`: converts a value to an integer.
* `*toFloat()*`: converts a value to a float (in this case, for monetary amounts).
* `*datetime()*`: converts a value to a datetime.

> We look at the values in each CSV file to determine what needs to be converted.

Reviewer: I think this sentence is redundant as the previous lines are already describing the process of checking the csv file.

```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: In line 359, products.csv needs to be in bold like previously seen. This is also valid for the following sections about the other files.

I would also break line 363 to make the paragraph less chunky and also fix the use of "we":

Though the sample values from your inspection are all whole numbers, monetary amounts often have decimal place values. 
For this reason, it is suggested to convert these values to float using the `toFloat()` function. 

Line 365 is also redundant:

Below is how you should run the Cypher query. 
Keep in mind that you are still not loading the values into Neo4j at this point.

65:10250:15
|===

[[loading-data]]
== Loading the data

> Now that you have determined that the CSV file data looks good, and you have verified how `LOAD CSV` sees the data and converted any non-string values, you are almost ready to create the data in our graph database!

Reviewer: Should we use exclamation mark in the docs?

65:10250:15
|===

[[loading-data]]
== Loading the data

> Now that you have determined that the CSV file data looks good, and you have verified how `LOAD CSV` sees the data and converted any non-string values, you are almost ready to create the data in our graph database!

Reviewer: Line 495: Though there are various ways to organize the products and orders in your files, this will be addressed on another guide. Use the below version of the model for the current exercise.

Reviewer: I can't address the following lines specifically, but check them as they have sentences using "we".

> After all, importing the data in the existing table and column data will not provide the value you want to achieve from a graph.

Reviewer: Previous line:

An important step you need to follow before writing Cypher statements, though, is to determine what the graph structure should look like once you import your data.

> After all, importing the data in the existing table and column data will not provide the value you want to achieve from a graph.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After all, importing the data to the existing tables and columns will not provide the value you want to achieve from a graph.
```

To utilize the graph database fully, you need a graph data model.

> Though there are a variety ways to organize the products and orders in your files, this will be addressed in another guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Though there are a variety of ways to organize the products and orders in your files, this will be addressed in another guide.
```

> Use the following version of the model for this exercise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the following version of the model for this exercise:
```

image::developer-desktop-csv-import-data_model-arr.svg[role="popup-link",width=700]

You have two nodes - one for a product and one for an order.
Each of those nodes have properties from the CSV files.
For the `Product`, you have ID, name, and unit cost.

> For the `Order`, you have ID, date/time, and country where it is going.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the `Order`, you have ID, date/time, and country where it is going to.
```

> The _order-details.csv_ file defines the relationship between those two nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *order-details.csv* file defines the relationship between those two nodes.
```

> That file has the product ID, the order ID it belongs to, and the quantity of the product on the order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It has the product ID, the order ID it belongs to, and the quantity of the product in the order.
```

> So, in the data model, this becomes the `CONTAINS` relationship between `Product` and `Order` nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the data model, these become the `CONTAINS` relationship between `Product` and `Order` nodes.
```

> A property of `quantityOrdered` also is uncluded on the relationship because the product quantity value only exists when a product is related to an order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The property `quantityOrdered` is also included to the relationship because the product quantity value only exists when a product is related to an order.
```

Now that you know the types of nodes and relationships you will have and the properties involved, you can construct the Cypher statements to create the data for this model.

> 

Reviewer: Line 494: criteria is a plural word, so it should be "are not violated"?

> In this exercise, you will add two constraints before you create any data - one for `productId` and one for `orderId`.

Reviewer: The previous line, does it mean "applying indexes to a database before any data is imported and when there is already existing data"?

This will ensure that, when you create a new node of each of those types or a relationship to connect them, you know the entities are unique and indexed.

Below is the Cypher for adding constraints:

[source, cypher]
----
CREATE CONSTRAINT UniqueProduct FOR (p:Product) REQUIRE p.id IS UNIQUE;
CREATE CONSTRAINT UniqueOrder FOR (o:Order) REQUIRE o.id IS UNIQUE;
----

[[write-statements]]
== Cypher queries

Now you are ready to write the Cypher for creating the data in the graph.
You could use the `CREATE` clause where you are sure that you will not have duplicate rows in your CSV file and use `MATCH` to find existing data for updates.

> However, since it is hard to completely scrub all data and import perfectly clean data from any source, you will use the `MERGE` clause to check if the data exists before inserting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, since it is hard to completely scrub all data and import perfectly clean data from any source, you will use the `MERGE` clause to check if the data already exists.
```

> If the node or relationship exists, Cypher will match and return (without any writes), but if it does not exist, Cypher will insert it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the node or relationship exists, Cypher will match and return them (without any writes), but if they do not exist, Cypher will insert it.
```

> Using `MERGE` can have some performance overhead, but often it is the better approach to maintain high data integrity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using `MERGE` can have some performance overhead, but often it is the best approach to maintain high data integrity.
```

[NOTE]
====
*Why use both constraints and `MERGE`:*
Using constraints is different from using the `MERGE` clause.
Statements that create data in violation of the constraint prompt an error, while statements that use the `MERGE` clause simply return existing values (no errors).
If you use both, you avoid terminating your load statements due to constraint violations, and you also ensure you don't accidentally create duplicates in adhoc queries.
====

> 

Reviewer: Suggestion for the following lines:

To start loading the products into the graph, use the `LOAD CSV` statement from above and then run the Cypher query to create the data from the CSV files into your model.
Remember to use `MERGE` to check whether the `Product` already exists.

In this exercise, you will add two constraints before you create any data - one for `productId` and one for `orderId`.
This will ensure that, when you create a new node of each of those types or a relationship to connect them, you know the entities are unique and indexed.

Below is the Cypher for adding constraints:

[source, cypher]
----
CREATE CONSTRAINT UniqueProduct FOR (p:Product) REQUIRE p.id IS UNIQUE;
CREATE CONSTRAINT UniqueOrder FOR (o:Order) REQUIRE o.id IS UNIQUE;
----

[[write-statements]]
== Cypher queries

Now you are ready to write the Cypher for creating the data in the graph.

> You could use `CREATE` clause where you are sure that you will not have duplicate rows in your CSV file and use `MATCH` to find existing data for updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You could use the `CREATE` clause where you are sure that you will not have duplicate rows in your CSV file and use `MATCH` to find existing data for updates.
```

> However, since it is hard to completely scrub all data and import perfectly clean data from any source, you will use `MERGE` clause to check if the data exists before inserting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, since it is hard to completely scrub all data and import perfectly clean data from any source, you will use the `MERGE` clause to check if the data exists before inserting.
```

If the node or relationship exists, Cypher will match and return (without any writes), but if it does not exist, Cypher will insert it.
Using `MERGE` can have some performance overhead, but often it is the better approach to maintain high data integrity.

[NOTE]
====

> *Why both constraints and `MERGE`?*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Why use both constraints and `MERGE`:*
```

> Using constraints is different from using `MERGE`.

Reviewer: The following line:

Statements that create data in violation of the constraint will prompt an error, while statements...

> 

Reviewer: Line 541, products.csv needs to be in bold

.Orders
Next, you will load the orders.
Again, since you want to verify you do not create duplicate `Order` nodes, you can use the `MERGE` clause.

> Just as with products, you start with the `LOAD CSV` command, then add Cypher queries and include your data conversions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just as with products, you start with the `LOAD CSV` command, then add Cypher queries, and include your data conversions.
```

image::developer-desktop-csv-import-verify_details.png[role="popup-link"]

[[import-wrapup]]
== Wrapping up

> You have successfully loaded three CSV files into a Neo4j graph database using Neo4j Desktop!

Reviewer: Again about the exclamation mark

Author: I removed it

The `LOAD CSV` functionality, coupled with Cypher, is exceptionally useful for getting data from files into a graph structure.

> The best way to advance your skills in this area is to load a variety of files for various data sets and models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The best way to advance your skills in this area is to load a variety of files for various datasets and models.
```
